---
layout: page
title: About
permalink: /about/
---

Hi my name is Ethan Xue! I'm a second year Software Engineering student at the University of Waterloo. I built this website mainly because I wanted to try out blogging, so head over to my [blog](/index) if you'd like, or keep on reading to learn more about me. <strong>Also, I'm currently looking for internship opportunities for the Fall 2018 term (September - December), so feel free to email me if you're interested in talking.</strong>

I have industry experience in mobile development, primarily in iOS, and web development. Some of the programming languages I've used in projects include Java, C++, JavaScript, Swift, Kotlin and Scala, and I'm currently learning Python. Being enrolled in the co-op program at UW, I've completed one work term already and I'm currently doing my second work term.

For my first coop term, I worked at [Zeitspace Inc.](http://zeitspace.com){:target="_blank"} as a Software Engineer. Zeitspace is a recently-established product design and development consulting agency in downtown Kitchener. I pioneered an iOS application for the local YMCA that was used by the families of 6000+ campers. I single-handedly completed the app, participating in all parts of the software production cycle, from design to development, testing, deployment, and maintenance. I implemented the Android version of the application thereafter, using the new Kotlin programming language. The iOS app had 90+ daily users at its peak, and 50+ for the Android app. I also contributed signicantly to the backend NodeJS server supporting both mobile platforms. For example, I implemented my own algorithm to efficiently aggregate user data in a background task and optimized SQL queries, which ultimately led to a boost in performance of data storage by 750%. I also worked in a team in an Agile setting to build a RESTful web application powered by ReactJS, NodeJS, and PostgreSQL for SHORE Centre, featuring a JavaScript survey framework for creating custom dynamic surveys, which I contributed to implementing from scratch. Last by not least, I developed and presented a 2+ hour hands-on technical workshop on Kotlin to 20+ industry professionals as an event on [meetup.com](https://www.meetup.com/Zeitspace/events/242825767/)

Currently, I'm working as a Full-Stack Engineer at [Zenreach](http://zenreach.com){:target="_blank"}, also located in downtown Kitchener. Zenreach is a late-stage startup heardquarted in California that provides Wifi marketing solutions for all kinds of businesses. Recently, they managed to raise $30 million in Series C funding, including contributions from NBA all-star Kevin Durant and actor/VC Ashton Kutcher. They use React in the frontend, and Python/Golang in the backend.

I was born and raised in Burnaby, B.C. before deciding to come study Sofware Engineering at UW. My hobbies include swimming, basketball, coding, travelling, hiking, weight-lifting, and video games.