---
layout: post
title:  "An intro to this blog"
date:   2017-01-14 00:00:00 -0500
categories: non-tech
---

There are a number of reasons why I decided to create this blog. Here are three main ones:

1) I want to improve my writing skills.

As a Software Engineering student, I rarely have the opportunity to refine my skills in academic writing. From as long as I can remember, I've never had an interest in English courses. I fine writing, especially essay writing, to be quite difficult, and I don't think I'm much of a "good" writer. Specifically, I'm quite slow at communicating my ideas through text, and coming up with ideas on what to write about in the first place has always been nothing short but difficult. Luckily, I'm not planning to write essays here --I'm planning to write a blog. Hence, I'm (hoping) that ideas will come more naturally to me since I'm going to be writing about experiences closely connected to me. Blogging in general just seems like a great way to hone my writing skills in a fun way, since I no longer have as much interaction with fine arts and literature as I did before university.

2) I want to share what I have learned with others.

I'm growing. I'm constantly learning new things. And sometimes, I feel like it would be quite worthwhile to share the knowledge I've gained with others. For example, the process of applying to universities was no trivial task. I went to so many info sessions and did so much research. It would be quite wasteful if I just kept the knowledge I've acquired through so much struggle and work all to myself would not it not?

3) I hope that blogging will allow me to reflect on my experiences and accomplishments, and to further myself accordingly.

Everyday, I experience ups and downs, positive experiences and negative ones. From the pursuit of my goals, to the people around me, there are so many things to learn from my surroundings. But time passes by so quickly. Therefore, it would be a good idea to pause occasionally and reflect on what I've learned from recent events in my life. That way, I feel that I would be making the most out of everything, which I hope will result in a more meaningful life.
